resolving merge conflicts
=========================

Many projects may manage their dependencies without ever having any reason to encounter a merge.
You depend on your test library, maybe you update it every 1~6 months at your leisure, everybody's happy, right?
Until someday, a coworker pulls down a broken library on master, you revert it on your feature branch to keep working, and meanwhile a fixed version is committed on master.
When dealing with stable APIs and libraries, getting into a merge conflict scenario may be rare, but it can happen.

More active projects that are closely coupled with their dependencies may move more rapidly.
Sometimes they may even have parallel branches in both projects where the dependency is a moving target along the the project using it.
In these situations, make no mistake, leveraging apart your projects as much as possible will always make your life easier in the long run (especially take note if you have tests for a dependency in your main project!  Refactor, Will Robinson, Refactor!).
mdm can still work in such close-coupled and fast-moving projects; however, there is no magick wand that can resolve the complexity you've signed up for with that tight relationship.
Sooner or later, no matter your choice of dependency management system, that tension is going to unwind into merge conflicts.

Whatever the cause, when merge conflicts come, here's how to cope!


encountering a merge conflict
-----------------------------

A merge conflict for dependencies managed by mdm looks a lot like any other merge conflict.
You get into a merge conflict situation by having two branches make simultaneous updates to the same library:

```
    *           <- feature branch updated to lib v1.2
    |
    |
    |      *    <- master updated to lib v1.1
    |      |
     \     /
      \   /
       \ /
        |
        *        <- master has lib v1.0
```

```

           *
         / |
       ??? |    <- what do we do here to choose??
       /   |            merge conflict!
      /    |
     /     |
    *      |    <- feature branch updated to lib v1.2
    |      |
    |      |
    |      *    <- master updated to lib v1.1
    |      |
     \     /
      \   /
       \ /
        |
        *        <- master has lib v1.0
```


### what does a merge conflict look like?

The output of a merge command that fails because of a dependency conflict looks like this:

```
$ git merge feature-branch
warning: Failed to merge submodule lib/junit (commits don't follow merge-base)
Auto-merging lib/junit
CONFLICT (submodule): Merge conflict in lib/junit
Auto-merging .gitmodules
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in .gitmodules
Automatic merge failed; fix conflicts and then commit the result.
```

Git status might look like this:

```
$ git status
# On branch master
# You have unmerged paths.
#   (fix conflicts and run "git commit")
#
# Unmerged paths:
#   (use "git add <file>..." to mark resolution)
#
#       both modified:      .gitmodules
#       both modified:      lib/junit
#
```

Notice that there are *two* entries in conflict.
If you've already read about where mdm stores information, this should already make sense to you.

- the conflict for `lib/junit` is where git is tracking the precise hash of the dependency link
- the conflict for `.gitmodules` is where mdm has stored the version name of the dependency link

The git diff for this pair of conflicts looks like this:

```
$ git diff
diff --cc .gitmodules
index 1d1e403,36ed635..0000000
--- a/.gitmodules
+++ b/.gitmodules
@@@ -2,5 -2,5 +2,11 @@@
        path = lib/junit
        url = http://mdm-releases.com/junit/junit-releases.git
        mdm = dependency
++<<<<<<< HEAD
 +      mdm-version = 4.8.2.mvn
++||||||| merged common ancestors
++      mdm-version = 4.7.mvn
++=======
+       mdm-version = 4.9.mvn
++>>>>>>> beta
        update = none
diff --cc lib/junit
index 1448485,2520ae6..0000000
--- a/lib/junit
+++ b/lib/junit
```

(You may not see the "merged common ancestors" part; that's a cool feature you can get by configuring 'merge.conflictstyle = diff3'.  Unrelated, but highly recommended in general.)

You can see in this example that everything adds up:
two branches diverged,
each changed the version of a library (junit, in this example) away from the common ancestor to conflicting versions,
the version names of which are shown in the `.gitmodules` file,
and the hashes of which are shown for the `lib/junit` path.


### other sources of a merge conflict

It's also possible to get a merge conflict in the `.gitmodules` file if no dependency versions were updated, but the file just drifted -- for example, say someone rearranged the order of entries.
There's nothing special about this kind of merge conflict either; just resolve it with normal text tools, and continue using mdm normally afterwards.



resolving a merge conflict
--------------------------

There are many possible ways to resolve a merge conflict.  We'll demonstrate some of the options.

There's one pattern you can keep in mind as constant throughout all of these ways of handling submodules:
first, you put the submodule where you want it;
then, you commit that!


### option one: pick all changes from one side

The easiest possible way to resolve a merge conflict is to choose all changes from one side.

For example, if you just merged a branch called `feature-branch`, and like in our example conflict above it chose different versions of junit, your whole flow would be these commands:

```
git merge --no-ff feature-branch      # generates a conflict.  oh noes!
git checkout --theirs -- .gitmodules  # take the lib version from feature-branch
mdm update                            # set the lib to that version
git add .gitmodules lib/junit         # stage the version name and hash for commit
git commit                            # success!
```


### option two: choose the desired versions

If you need to resolve a more complicated merge -- say, you want to take library A from the feature branch, but keep library B from the master branch -- the steps are similar.

- Edit the .gitmodules file manually to resolve merge conflicts, or use a graphical merge tool of your choice.
- Run `mdm update` to yank all libraries to the versions specified.
- `git add` and `git commit` the changes.


### option three: ???

This is git we're talking about.  There's at least 800+ other ways to do this, if you stare into the man pages long enough.



show, don't tell
----------------

There's a bash script called "test-merge.sh" in the root of the mdm source repo.
You can use it to demonstrate both the merge conflict above and how to resolve it.
The examples given above are actually copy-paste from the output of that script.



merge conflicts gone wrong
--------------------------

There is one major caveat when performing merge conflict resolution:

**Both the version name and the link hash must move at the same time**.

Usually, this should happen naturally when using any of the conflict resolution mechanisms described above.

This parity is critical because if mdm fetches a dependency by version name, but finds a hash it did not expect, mdm is very concerned and issues loud warnings to users when updating these dependencies.

These warnings are particularly loud because an incorrectly resolved merge conflict is indistinguishable from several other problems which manifest as a hash mismatch:

1. your remote git host has been compromised.  a malicious actor tried to insert viral binary code into your dependencies.
2. someone accidentally pushed another release with the same version name.  your builds are now broken and your QA process circumvented.
3. a merge commit changed either the version name or the hash without updating the other

One of these three situations is a potentially serious security issue ([and you'd better believe it happens](https://www.fortify.com/downloads2/public/fortify_attacking_the_build.pdf)).
The other two are merely operator error, but still potentially break builds, and should be reviewed and fixed promptly.


### correcting a merge conflict gone wrong

Fortunately, correcting a merge conflict gone wrong is simple.

First, review the version name in your project's `.gitmodules` file.  If it's not what you expected, fix it and `git add .gitmodules`.

Second, run `mdm update`.  This will place the dependency submodule to the version you named in the `.gitmodules` file.
If `git status` reports the path as changed, `git add lib/examplelib`.

Finally, commit.

Why Yes, this did look very similar to just resolving the merge conflict the first time.  :)


