performing releases
===================


quickref
--------

```bash
git clone https://github.com/bananaman/split-releases.git
mkdir build_output
touch build_output/example_file
mdm release --repo split-releases --files build_output/ --version v5000

# check locally that this looks legit!
# you can read more about what to expect later in this page.

cd split-releases
git push --tags
git push --all
```


step by step
------------

Performing a release with mdm places a new commit in a release repository.

### get the release repo

First, you must have the repository you're going to commit to!
So, if you don't have it already, clone it:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/bananaman/split-releases.git
```

### build the files you want to release

Now, we must have some files to release.  Let's do several files, to make it interesting.
We'll gather them all into one directory so we can provide them easily to mdm:
```bash
mkdir build_output
touch build_output/script.sh
touch build_output/logo.jpg
mkdir build_output/manual
touch build_output/manual/readme.txt
```

Note: you probably don't want to put the build_output stuff inside the release repo.
The `mdm release` command needs to shuffle files around as it's commiting the release, so it needs to start with the release repo in a clean state.


### release!

Stuff to release?  check.

A release repo to commit it to?  check.

Okay!  Let's perform the release:

```bash
mdm release \
  --repo=split-releases \
  --files=build_output \
  --version=v5000
```

Pointing the `mdm release` command at the `build_output/` directory causes it to commit a release with all the files in that directory.

You can use any sort of relative path you want, both for the release repo and to select the files to release.
(All of these commands assume you never changed directory.)
This can be useful you have a more complicated example -- perhaps you want to pick up your existing build output, or store releases repos somewhere else?

Similarly, the version name can be anything you choose!
mdm commands like `mdm add` and `mdm alter` will use a version-sort (i.e. "v2.14.0" is later than "v2.2"), so it's easy to follow [semver](http://semver.org/), and when users link to your library, they'll be presented with their choices in the correct order.
But you're free to release things with names like `--version=canned.tuna` if that's your fancy.

### check locally that this looks legit

Performing `mdm release`, just like `git commit`, is a purely local operation.
That means you can review what just got added to the release repo, and push it after you're sure you're happy with the results.
(If you don't like what you see, scroll down to the section on "backing out of a unsatisfactory release".)

TODO maybe migrate this whole section into the AnatomyOfReleases page

Here's what you should see in `git log` (or the GUI of your choice):

- one new commit titled "release version v5000" -- the release commit.
  - This commit contains exactly the files you provided to `mdm release` command.
  - This commit is an orphan commit -- it's a new root of history.  (See the section on [fetching only what you need](4.4-fetching-only-what-you-need.md) for more one why.)
  - This commit is dated to the epoch, and regardless of who you are, the author is set to "mdm".  (See the section on [commit convergence](4.5-commit-convergence.md) for more one why.)
- a second new commit titled "merge release version v5000 to master"
  - This commit does exactly what it says on the tin: it's a commit on the `master` branch, and it merges in that release commit.
  - In this commit, all of the files you provided to `mdm release` command are now in a folder named "v5000" (or whatever you named your release version).

The release commit is referenced by both a branch, and a tag.
The branch is so that mdm can fetch it by name.
The tag is there so that you can sign the commit if you so desire.
(We won't cover commit signing in these documents, but you can see the git manual pages for more on that.)

### share with the world

```bash
git push --tags
git push --all
```

Push both branches and tags, and that's it!
Your release is now shared with the world!

Anyone should now be able to execute `mdm add protocol://example.host/whirlygig-releases.git`,
and they'll see a release version named "v5000" available to link to their project.


backing out of a unsatisfactory release
---------------------------------------

Nobody ever makes mistakes when doing something as important as committing a release, right?  ;)
Here's what to do in case of the unthinkable.

First of all, if you already pushed this publicly, stop.  Consider what you're about to do very carefully.
Backing out of a publicly pushed mdm release is about as worrysome as performing a `git push -f` -- it can permanently wreck somebody else's day, because it destroys information.
(In fact, it's *exactly* as worrysome as a `git push -f` -- that's actually one of the steps!)
But, if you're in a controlled situation (say, a company-internal library release, and you're absolutely certain nobody's depending on it yet), you have been warned, and if you know the risks you may proceed.

TODO


